--- PAGE 0 ---
MANI-002
PHYSICAL
ANTHROPOLOGY
PRIMATE STUDY
UNIT 1
Living Primates 5
UNIT 2
Primate Behaviour 24
UNIT 3
Phylogeny of Living Primates and Primate Anatomy 42
Block
3
Indira Gandhi
National Open University
School of Social Sciences

--- PAGE 1 ---
Programme Coordinator: Dr. Rashmi Sinha, SOSS, IGNOU, New Delhi
Course Coordinator: Dr. Rashmi Sinha, SOSS, IGNOU, New Delhi
Blocks Preparation Team
Print Production
Mr. Manjit Singh
Section Officer (Pub.), SOSS, IGNOU, New Delhi
August, 201 1
 Indira Gandhi National Open University , 201 1
ISBN-978-81-266-5547-2
All rights reserved. No par t of this work may be r eproduced in any form, by mimeograph or any other
means, without permission in writing fr om the Indira Gandhi National Open University .
Further information on Indira Gandhi National Open University courses may be obtained fr om the
University's office at Maidan Gar hi. New Delhi-1 10 068.
Printed and published on behalf of the Indira Gandhi National Open University , New Delhi by the
Director, School of Social Sciences.
Laser Typeset by : Tessa Media & Computers, C-206, A.F.E.-II, Okhla, New Delhi
Printed at :
Content Editor Language Editor
Professor V. Rami Reddy
Retired, Department of Anthropology
S V University, Tirupati
Mrs. Narinder Jit Kaur
Retired, Associate Professor in English
Government Mohindra College, Patiala
Unit Writers
Professor P. K. Seth  (Unit 1 & 2)
Retired, Deptt. of  Anthropology,
University of Delhi, Delhi
Professor R. P. Srivastava (Unit 3 )
Retired, Deptt. of Anthropology
University of Lucknow, Lucknow.
Expert Committee
Professor I. J. S. Bansal
Retired, Department of Human Biology
Punjabi University
Patiala
Professor K. K. Misra
Director
Indira Gandhi Rashtriya Manav
Sangrahalaya, Bhopal
Professor Ranjana Ray
Retired, Department of Anthropology,
Calcutta University
Kolkata
Professor P. Chengal Reddy
Retired, Department of Anthropology
S V University,  Tirupati
Professor  R. K. Pathak
Department of Anthropology
Panjab University
Chandigarh
Professor A. K. Kapoor
Department of Anthropology
University of Delhi, Delhi
Professor V.K.Srivastava
Principal, Hindu College
University of Delhi, Delhi
Professor Sudhakar Rao
Department of Anthropology
University of Hyderabad, Hyderabad
Professor S.Channa
Department of Anthropology
University of Delhi, Delhi
Professor P. Vijay Prakash
Department of Anthropology
Andhra University
Visakhapatnam
Dr. Nita Mathur
Associate Professor
Faculty of Sociology
School of Social Sciences
Indira Gandhi National Open University
Maidan Garhi, New Delhi
Dr. S. M. Patnaik
Associate Professor
Department of Anthropology
University of Delhi, Delhi
Dr. Manoj Kumar Singh
Assistant Professor
Department of Anthropology
University of Delhi, Delhi
Faculty of Anthropology
SOSS, IGNOU
Dr. Rashmi Sinha, Reader
Dr. Mitoo Das, Assistant Professor
Dr. Rukshana Zaman, Assistant Professor
Dr. P Venkatramana, Assistant Professor
Dr. K. Anil Kumar, Assistant Professor
Authors are responsible for the academic content of this course as far as the copy right issues are concerned.
Cover Design
 Dr. Mitoo Das
Asstt. Professor, Anthropology,  SOSS, IGNOU

--- PAGE 2 ---
BLOCK 3 PRIMATE STUDY
Introduction
Man is primate of the primates with a unique place in the animal kingdom due to
most distinguishable primate characteristics. He and the non-human primates of
apes and monkeys descended from a common ancestor. The non-human primates
particularly the apes are our close relatives. Primates as multi-cellular animals
are mammals with a rather generalised anatomy . Two categories can be
distinguished among the primates: prosimians or lower monkeys (tree-shrews,
lemurs, lorises and tarsiers), anthoropoids or higher primates (New World or
platyrrhine monkeys, Old World or Catarrhine monkeys and man). There are
many characteristics which are common to both the groups of primates. Humans
are closely related to great apes as shown by anatomical- molecular-behavioural
evidences inspite of many typical characteristics in which they differ from each
other. The ancestral or basal primate stock separated from the common eutherian
stock, emer ged as an independent order and evolved as prosimians during
Palaeocene of 70-60 myr BP, as cuboids and pongids of Oligocene of 40-20 myr
BP, and as protohominids during Pliocene of 12-4 myr BP. Squirrel-like, simple
prosimian primates made their first appearance, followed by their adaptive
radiation till the Oligocene time when the New World monkey and the anthropoid
apes came to the scene. The predominance of the latter continued during the
Miocene epoch. During the Miocene and Pliocene epochs the Pliopithicus-
Proconsul-Dryopithecus-Ramapithicus groups made remarkable progress in the
Old World. Of all the classifications of primates, the one by G G Simpson seems
to be most convincing.
The human behaviour including that of the extinct hominids can be best
understood and interpreted from the studies of non-human primates in their natural
setting. This has to be gauged from the findings of field investigations among
the non-human primates on their activity pattern, social or ganisation, mating
patterns, reproduction, parental care, territoriality , communication, life span,
dominance and aggression, communication, social behaviour, sexual behaviour,
and so on. These behavioural aspects have been examined among such non-
human primates as rhesus monkeys, baboons, presbytis, and great apes. The
rhesus monkey helped in the discovery of Rh factor, which has been found to be
hereditary in Homo sapiens. The great apes have been found to be similar to
humans in anatomical, physiological and behavioural traits.
In the construction of primate phylogenies including those of hominids, the
biological sciences of palaeontology , comparative anatomy and morphology
played a significant role. These methods have been found to be inadequate in the
matter of convincing interpretation of the phylogenies. Recent advances in modern
genetics revealed the development of important techniques and approaches of
signal importance in understanding the relationships between the great apes and
man. Among these can be mentioned the immunological technique, molecular
approaches, DNA hybridisation, mobile DNA elements approach, and human-
chimpanzee-gorilla tricnotomy . Morris Goodman’ s 1960s analysis revealed
greater similarity between African apes and man than between Asian apes and
humans. Sarich and Wilson through their molecular approach in 1971 found that
man; gorilla and chimpanzee shared a common ancestor about five million years

--- PAGE 3 ---
4
Primate Study ago. Yunish and Prakash, Mai and kluge all in 1983 and Schwar in 1984 found
biomolecular similarities between man and African apes. DNA hybridisation,
mobile DNA elements approach and man-gorilla-chimpanzee trichotomy also
support the above findings. The process of hominisation is supported by details
of comparative anatomy of man and apes in the context of skull, spine, pectoral
girdle, pelvic girdle, and lower limbs. The block on Primate Study will facilitate
in understanding Man better.

--- PAGE 4 ---
5
Living Primates
UNIT 1 LIVING PRIMATES
Contents
1.1 Introduction
1.2 Definition
1.3 Characteristics
1.4 Evolutionary Trends
1.5 Classification
1.6 Distribution
1.7 Adaptation
1.8 Summary
1.9 Glossary
References
Suggested Reading
Sample Questions
Learning Objectives
We consider ourselves as the highest among all beings. But we hardly know
about ourselves. Once you have studied, this unit you will be able to understand
the
/head2right distribution of MAN including non-human primates (our closest relatives);
/head2right characteristics of MAN including non-human primates;
/head2right classification of MAN including non-human primates; and
/head2right evolution of MAN including non-human primates.
1.1 INTRODUCTION
That modern MAN, Homo sapiens sapiens, is a primate and a close cousin of
monkeys and apes cannot be denied. Yet, few people understand the relationship
between them. Neither man nor the non-human primates can be defined on the
basis of one or two features. They can be best defined on the basis of the general
pattern displayed by them or by the complexes of their characteristics. So, what
do we mean by the term primate (as this term also includes human beings)?
Unless we know this, it would be difficult for us to proceed with our discussion
on living primates, “our close relatives”.
Carl von Linnaeus, a Swedish botanist, chose the term ‘primate’(meaning first
or the highest amongst all), for the specific order Primates of Animal Kingdom,
Class Mammalia, including humans and the nonhuman primates, i.e., lemurs,
tree-shrews, lorises, aye-ayes, pottos, bush babies, tarsiers, monkeys and apes.
From a little shrew like ancestor, these animals are dominating this kingdom.
The evolutionary story of the primates – beginning from the prosimians at
one end of the spectrum to the highly complex man at the other end – is
now revealed in an ever new and fascinating manner.
ὖE

